Okay, let me tell you a little bit
more about how tf-idf scores and
the cosine similarity measure get used
together in a ranked IR retrieval system.
I'm not going to get a lot into the
details of making these systems practical
and efficient, at least give you
a little bit more of a sense.
So the first thing that you might have
already started to notice is that tf-idf
weighting isn't really one thing.
It's really a family of measures.
Let's just look at that in
a little bit more detail.
So first of all you have
the term frequency, and
what you do with the term frequency.
And you could just have
the natural term frequency, but
we suggested that that is usually
muted by something like log weighting.
And that's indeed the most
common thing to do,
but it's not the only
method that's been used.
There have been a bunch of other
methods that have been suggested for
normalizing term frequency.
Then if we move on to
the document frequency,
we cannot use document
frequency weighting at all.
We can use this kind of log inverse
document frequency weighting,
which is again extremely common.
But again there are other things
that people have tried out doing.
So if we put these two things together we
have tf-idf weighting giving us a vector.
But what we may want to normalize
those vectors in some way to have,
and have better similarity computations.
And so, we discussed using
the cosine length normalization,
and it turns out that it has some
advantages and some disadvantages.
So again there are other things people
have tried including both of these and
other ones that have come up more
recently sort of things like pivoted
length normalization.
So in general we have kind
of a broad menu of choices.
And so
at the beginning here of each column
I've given some letter
names to these choices.
These were choices that were
developed in the context
of the SMART Information Retrieval System,
which is a very famous pioneering
information retrieval system that was
developed at Cornell by Jerry Sultan,
who was really the father of a lot
of modern information retrieval.
So these choices could be given
names by giving letters from these.
So if you were using the system that we've
mainly been talking about That will be
coming out as ltc, for logarithm,
logarithmic idf, and cosine waiting.
And so this kind of waiting it then
turns out can be used both for
queries and documents differently.
And so let's go through a little
bit How that all comes out,
so we can have different weightings for
queries vs documents.
And if we follow this smart notation,
the standard way that they represented
things is these six letters
with a dot in the middle.
Where there's the document
weighting scheme,
followed by the query weighting scheme.
There are various variants, but
one that was quite standard coming out of
the SMART work in the 1990s was this one.
We will just mention this one
in a little bit more detail.
If we do the query part of it first
what we find out is that there is log
query normalisation,
now this is actually only makes
a difference if you have long queries,
it might mention words multiple times.
If really you have short queries and
no word is mentioned more than once.
That you're just going to be getting
a weight of 1 for words that appear and
0 for words that don't appear.
There's then idf weighting of the query
terms and cosign normalization.
The treatment for
the documents is the same,
except there's actually no idf
normalization of the documents.
And that's something that you might
want to think about for a moment.
Is that a bad idea?
There is some reasons to want to do that.
One of them is, well you have
already put in an idf vector for
the same words in the query.
Because remember that you are only
going to get non zero scores for
words that occur in both the query and
the document.
And that there are some advantages
in terms of efficiency of
compressing indices if you
are not putting idf in there.
Let's take this waiting scheme and
again go through a concrete example,
so we're just going to be
working out the score for
precisely one document against It's
one query using this waiting scheme.
But we'll do it in great depth.
Okay, so our document is car
insurance auto insurance.
That's a bit of a fake document but
we wanted something short.
And then the query is best car insurance.
So if we go to the query first, best car
insurance, these are its raw weights.
And so then, we're going to scale
those with logarithmic scaling, but
since each word only occurred once,
it stays one.
We then get the document
frequency of each of those words,
which we map onto an inverse
document frequency, so.
The rarer words like insurance
are getting the highest
waiting there we then multiply
this column by this column,
which ends up looking just like
the document frequency score except for
the word that didn't occur.
And then we turn that into a unit
vector with cosine normalization.
And so this is our final
representation of the query vector.
We then move to the document.
So the document has some term
frequencies that aren't just zero one,
so we reduce those with term frequency
ratings that look like that.
In this case there is no idf
component on the document,
so the weights go to being exactly
the same just coming from tome frequency.
And then we can do co-sign normalization
which gives this as our
final document vector.
Okay, then to work out the score for
this document for this query then
working out the co-sign similarity.
It's just simply the dot product of these
two length normalized vectors, and so
that's then this vector here where only
the bottom two components are non zero.
So we add those up and
the overall score is 0.8.
So the document is a good match for
the query.
Though I mean do remember when you
look at co-signs similarities.
Because of the fact that the co-sign
kind of is sort of flat at the top here
flat for
sending it means that you tend to get for
fairly similar documents the cosine
scores are sort of biased fairly high.
So it's more important to remember
the ordering than the precise values.
Okay, but that shows you how
we evaluated that document and then we'd
evaluate a bunch of other documents, and
then we'd want to rank according
to their cosine similarity scores.
A little exercise that you might like
to do based on this example is well,
if you know what the IDF scores
are here and the document frequencies.
You should actually be able to not work
out what is the number of documents
as being used as the basis
of this example.
Okay now, let's go through how we
can work out cosine scores and
a vector space retrieval system for
a document collection.
This is the rough kind of algorithm
that we're going to want to use.
So what we're going to assume
here Is that the query is
a typical short web-like query.
So, we're only going to be thinking
of the words as either occurring or
not occurring in the query.
And, also,
we're going to skip one other step, then.
We're not actually going to do any
length normalization of the query.
And part of the reason for
that is when you have a situation
like this late normalization of
the query is actually unnecessary because
the query vector has some length.
And for whatever it is, the effective
length normalization would just be
a rescaling that applies to all
query document calculations and
wouldn't change the final result.
Okay, so
given that background what do we do?
So we start off by having the scores array
for all documents which we st to zero.
And so, we're going to accumulate
in here the score of a document for
different query terms.
And so, these scores are often
referred to as accumulators.
Okay, and then we're also going
to have another array for
the length of the different documents.
Ans so then what we do is go through
each term in the query and we say.
Well, the query term is
actually just going to be one,
and then we fetch the postings list for
that query.
So then, for
each document in the postings list.
The term has a frequency in that document.
And, we may then want to scale that,
by doing something like log weighting or
something like that.
But, and to give us our
document weight for the term.
And then we're doing the components for
the dot product here, and
summing them into the Scores array.
So in essence, where kind of
the outer iteration here is for
each query term, and we're working out
the components of the cosine score.
For each query term and
accumulating it in this scores array.
We haven't actually done any length
normalization of the documents either yet,
so then the next step is to work
out the length of each document.
And then divide these scores
by the length of the document.
So this then does the length normalization
for different document sizes.
So given the assumptions I
mentioned at the beginning,
that the query vector is 1 / 0 and
we don't need to length normalize it.
We have something that
is now ordered the same.
As a length, and [INAUDIBLE] cosine
similarity score for the documents.
And so then for our ranking,
what we just want to return is
the sum number K, of documents, their ids.
These are the representation of them
that has the highest value for scores.
Now, if you think about the little this
isn't quite yet a practical algorithm.
So if our document collection is huge.
We actually want tot build
an array which has save
every document say tat we might
have 20 billion document.
So something like that and
say system used methods to work out
are likely documents, and
only accumulators for those documents.
And similarly at the end,
it's not a good way to find the most
relevant documents by simply doing
a linear scan of this scores array, and so
there are more efficient
data structures to do that.
But I hope that that's given you
a general idea of how we can build
cosine similarity scoring into
a ranked retrieval engine.
So to summarize,
the essence of what we've covered for
vector space retrieval
is the following steps.
That the query represented
as a t f i d f vector.
The document is also represented
And then, to score a pair of a query and
a document Command.
We're working out cosine
similarity scores,
which we straightforwardly use
to rank the documents with.
And then what we'll do in the first
instance is return some top Ks, for
example the top ten documents
according to this score to the user
as their initial results.
And if they ask for more,
we can then show them more.
Okay, so that's the general idea of
how we can start to build a tf-idf
retrieval system.